Home
For You
Canada
World
Business
Investing
Personal Finance
Opinion
Politics
Sports
Life
Arts
Drive
Real Estate

Bank of Canada interest rate decisions

Follow
The Bank of Canada cut its key interest rate to 3.25 per cent on December 11 – its fifth consecutive cut in a long-awaited monetary policy easing cycle.
Pipeline stocks are roaring. Here’s why
TC Energy headquarters in Calgary on July 30, 2024. THE CANADIAN PRESS/Todd Korol
Fed, ECB - and more from Trump: World market themes for the week ahead
European Union flags flutter on the day European Central Bank (ECB) President Christine Lagarde speaks to reporters following the Governing Council's monetary policy meeting in Frankfurt, Germany September 12, 2024.
Canadian mortgage rates could be in for a bumpy ride in the Trump era
A realtor’s sign is seen outside a home for sale on Dundas St. near Trinity Bellwoods Park in Toronto, on Dec 11, 2024. (Fred Lum/The Globe and Mail)
newsletter
Business Brief: This is a (mostly) tariff-free zone
Shipping containers in Long Beach, California.
newsletter
Morning Update: Introducing Canada’s most livable city

What is the Bank of Canada's key interest rate today?
The Bank of Canada's key interest rate is 3.25 per cent.


When is the Bank of Canada's next interest rate announcement?
The next interest rate announcement is January 24, 2025.

What’s happening with inflation in Canada?
Inflation is a generalized increase in consumer prices that erodes the purchasing power of money. It’s measured by looking at the Consumer Price Index (CPI), which captures price changes across a broad range of goods and services. The Bank of Canada’s raison d’être is keeping inflation low and stable, and it targets a 2-per-cent annual increase in the CPI.

Over the past three years, Canada – like many countries around the world – has experienced high inflation for the first time in decades. The annual rate of CPI inflation started rising in the spring of 2021 and reached a peak of 8.1 per cent in June 2022.

Inflation has fallen considerably over the past 18 months, in part because higher interest rates have forced some households and businesses to curb their spending. The inflation rate fell to 2.5 per cent in July, the lowest annual inflation rate since March, 2021. But in the final stages of their inflation fight, central bankers are worried about downside risks to the economy and the potential for inflation to overshoot the 2-per-cent target on the way down.

Today, the cost of shelter is the single biggest driver of inflation. This includes mortgage interest costs, which have been pushed higher by the Bank of Canada’s own interest rate hikes, as well as rents. Shelter inflation is being driven in large part by a combination of high demand, due to rapid population growth, and a shortage of housing supply, due to structural impediments to home building.

What’s the Bank of Canada doing about inflation?
The Bank of Canada uses interest rates to speed up or slow down the economy in an effort to control inflation. Higher interest rates make it more expensive for individuals and businesses to borrow money and service their debts. This reduces demand for goods and services, hopefully slowing the pace of price increases.

The central bank raised interest rates 10 times between March, 2022 and July, 2023, bringing its benchmark rate to 5 per cent from 0.25 per cent in one of the most aggressive monetary policy tightening campaigns on record. It held the policy rate steady at 5 per cent over the past six rate decisions.

The bank kicked off its long-awaited monetary policy easing cycle in June. – cutting its benchmark interest rate for the first time in four years – followed by two more quarter-percentage-point rate cuts in July and September. The central bank also said that it is now putting more emphasis on downside risks to economic growth, rather than focusing mainly on the risk of a rebound in inflation.


How do the Bank of Canada rate hikes affect average Canadians?
Most Canadians experience interest rates through mortgages and various forms of consumer debt, including credit cards, personal loans and auto loans. The interest rate on both variable-rate and fixed-rate mortgages has risen dramatically over the past two years, making it harder for new buyers to get into the housing market and increasing monthly expenses for existing homeowners when they renew their mortgages.

Higher interest rates also impact the economy as a whole. Canadian economic growth has essentially stalled since the middle of 2023, as consumers have cut spending and businesses have pulled back on investment. Companies have slowed hiring and the rate of unemployment is on the rise.

So far the Canadian economy has avoided an outright recession. But the Bank of Canada expects economic activity to remain weak through the first half of 2024, before picking up in the second half of the year and into 2025.